(joyful music)
Why did the developer quit their job?
because they wanted arrays.
We are going to be learning about arrays, finally,
how to create them, how to add items to them,
how to remove items, things like that.
And then in the next section,
we'll go into looping over the array.
So, what is an array?
An array is used for holding a list of items
where the order matters.
Each thing inside of an array is called an item
and its position in the array is called an index.
So the thing is called an item
and where it remains in the array is called an index.
The number of items inside of an array is called a length.
And each item inside of an array can be any type.
So it can be a string, a number, a boolean, an object,
another array, a nested array, you name it.
So let's go and jump into arrays dot html.
I'm gonna give myself a quick little script tag
if it's not there already.
And to create an array, you simply say const.
And we'll use a list of names.
And we use square brackets.
So whereas the curly brackets are for an object,
the square brackets are for noting
you are creating an array.
This is what is referred to as an array literal.
You can also do something like this new array,
just like we looked at doing new number,
new object, things like that.
But almost always, in fact, always in my case,
we are going to be using the array literal syntax here.
Then, to create items inside of an array,
you can simply just say, wes, kait, snickers.
So what I've done there is I've created an array,
three items, every item is separated by a comma.
And we can go ahead and open that up in our browser,
take a look at it.
So we have our names.
And it is an array.
Open it up, you see that we have our three items.
Looks a lot like an object,
except that there are no keys in array.
So that's the sort of the main
difference between an object and an array,
is that an array has no keys,
the keys are always going to be indexes,
meaning these, zero, one, two, three, four, five.
Now, one little sort of thing I can tell you right now
is if we type typeof and names, what are we gonna get?
What?
Type of names is an object.
And you may be going back to like
one of the first videos we did,
where we listed all the types that we have.
And you notice that we didn't
actually say that array was a type.
So an array isn't its own type,
it is just an object at the end of the day,
meaning that it can hold data,
and it has a bunch of methods that live inside of it.
So if you are checking, this is just a bit of an aside,
if you ever wanna know if something is an array,
the way that you should do that
is you take Array.isArray and you pass it names,
and we'll talk about this right here.
This is what's referred to as a static method.
We'll go into that a little bit later on.
That will be true or false,
whether something is an array or not.
You see, that gives you false.
All right, so we've got this names array here.
And if you want to access things from the array,
how do you do it, right?
Because we can't just say names.wes
because that's object.
That's an object.
That's how you access properties in an object.
So if you wanna access things inside of an array,
you use their index.
So again, console.log names and we'll use
square bracket one.
So that should give us what?
You think it should give us the first item in the array?
So we'll refresh and we'll see wes, kait, what?
One, what's two?
So there's three items, two should give us snickers.
So what does three?
What's going on here?
Well, I'd like to tell you
that arrays are what are referred to as zero based,
meaning the counting starts at zero
and the two little things I like to tell everybody
when we're talking about zero base,
so that you'll remember them.
First of all, I went to McDonald's once.
And I once got, I was order number zero.
And then I went to McDonald's another time,
and I was ordered number 99.
And it was just so
that the numbers were huge on the receipt.
And they had enough space on the receipt
to fit up to two numbers.
But their ordering system did
like a hundred numbers at once, right.
And then once you hit order a hundred,
it rolls over and starts again.
So, what they did is instead of going from one to a hundred,
because then order 100 wouldn't fit on the receipt,
they started at zero based, going from zero to 99.
And that still gives you a full hundred orders.
So that's my first story.
My second story is that when I got married,
we had a table zero.
So I think we had, the last table that we had was 23,
meaning that we had how many tables?
24, because we had zero based our tables,
the head table was zero and it went up.
That was very confusing to the people
that were working there.
And I wouldn't recommend it,
unless you're a hardcore developer like me.
So in order to access the first item in an array,
you just console log the first item with a zero.
Now if I were to check how many items are in here,
so console log, names, we can use .length
Similarly we use with maps, we use size.
But with an array, we use length
to see how many items are in the array.
And that is not zero based, okay.
So if you wanna access things based on their index,
it is zero base.
But if you wanna know how many items are in the array,
it is not zero base that's going to tell us
how many items are in there.
Now if I wanna get the last item of this names array,
I could console log, names, square bracket, two,
and that will obviously give us snickers.
But if I don't know how long this array is,
like what if I did this?
This is going to be bananas, there.
I have no idea how many items are in this array, right.
If I take a look at, oh now I know, it's 27.
But if I didn't know how many items were in this array,
how would I access the last one?
Well, what you could do is, you could
take the length property and use that as a reference
to see how many items are in the array.
So let's let's try that.
Undefined.
Why is that?
That's because names 27 is nothing.
Names 26 is actually the last item that we have there.
By the way, this is a trailing comma, totally fine.
You can do that if you like.
So how do we access the last item using the length?
You just take one Whatever the length is,
and you minus one from that,
and that will return the last one.
And we can see that snickers is the last one,
we change that to last one.
Here, we have actual access to it.
Now, an array is loaded with a whole bunch of methods
for working with it.
We've already sort of peeked forward
into dot for each, which is for looping.
However, the array prototype
has all kinds of little methods
for adding and removing and finding things
inside of the array.
So if we take a look at names.
I'm gonna move this back just to three items.
And now we look at names,
open it up, open up the prototype,
and you'll see there's concat, copyWithin,
fill, find, pop, push, snap, crackle, pop, join, index,
all kinds of neat things for working with an array
and I'm not gonna make you sit here
and I'm gonna show you how absolutely
every single one works.
We'll go through some of the more important ones.
And I think more importantly,
we're gonna be learning about this idea of immutability,
and mutable and immutable.
Because I think that's much more important.
And you can read the docs as to how they work.
And we're gonna be using them all throughout
all of the exercises that we do in this course.
So, let's talk about this kind of scary word
of mutable and immutable right now.
And we've mentioned it a few times,
but let's go over it again.
Mutable methods perform mutations.
If you think about the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
Why were they mutants?
Because they were, one thing,
they were just regular turtles,
and then they mutated into like teenagers
and they had powers, right,
and they wore cool bandanas.
So, when something changes the original version of it,
that is what is referred to as a mutation.
Now we have this other thing
which is referred to as immutable,
meaning the methods do not change the original thing,
but they simply return a new array.
So let's go into a couple examples
that will sorta illustrate how things work.
So we'll first look at a mutation method.
If we have a new array of numbers,
and we do something, let's just one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine,
and I were to call numbers.reverse
and store that result in a new variables
called numbersBackwards
and console log numbersBackwards.
What are we gonna get there?
Is that gonna be that the array reversed?
Is it gonna be something?
It is.
It gives us the array that has been reversed.
Now if I were then to console log numbers,
my question is, is the original array still in this order?
Or has it been deleted?
Has it been removed?
Has it been changed in any way?
Has it been changed?
Meaning has it been mutated?
Now let's refresh.
So, the original array has actually
also been reversed as well.
And that is what is referred to as a mutation,
meaning that the original data
has been changed from what it was initially set out to be.
Now, so we don't even need
to have the secondary variable right here,
we simply just have to run reverse,
and that will mutate itself.
Now that's not necessarily bad,
or incorrect or something,
it's just something to know about.
JavaScript is that some methods
will modify the original array,
whereas some will just create a new array
and leave the original one intact.
And if you spend any time around,
like functional programmers,
or a lot of React developers,
we sorta have this mantra of like,
don't actually mutate the original array,
just create like a new version of it.
That is the modified version.
So what's an immutable example of one of the methods?
Well, if we take our numbers here,
and I'm gonna comment out this reverse here,
because I don't actually want it to reverse,
and we use the slice method.
The slice method will allow us to take
a portion of the array and make it into our own array.
So if I wanna take a slice,
I wanna take numbers two through four,
and stick that into a new array.
So we'll call that pizzaSlice
and console log pizzaSlice,
you'll see, what we've done here is
we've gone from index two,
which is the third item
and stopped at four.
And that returns us the sort of a subset of an array.
So if you ever wanna take sort of a chunk of an array out,
you can use slice.
Now the question is, if I were to console log
the original numbers array,
is that three and four going to be taken out of here?
No, it's not.
You see, it's there and it's there.
So that is referred to as immutable methods,
meaning they do not change the original data,
and mutable or mutation methods,
they do change the original data.
So this is a huge source.
I literally have gotten bitten by that bug
a couple months ago with the reverse,
I forgot that reverse was a mutable method.
So it actually bit me because
it was reversing the original one.
And then the second time I ran it, it reversed it back.
And I was running into this loop where
every other time that it was reversed in the wrong order.
So what's someone to do if one of your methods is mutable,
and you don't want it to actually mutate it?
So we'll do a little comment here.
We'll say anytime you want to
use a mutation method
and not mutate the original array,
there's certainly lots of situations
where you're fine with mutating the array
and if that's the case then just go ahead along your day.
But if there is a case where you're like,
I need to leave this original data intact,
and just change the new one,
you need to take a copy of the original array.
So we need to take a copy of the array.
So what we'll do here is we'll say
const numbersReversed is equal to,
and we'll take a new array.
And how do we copy an array?
Well, we can spread the old one into it.
So numbers, let's take a look here.
Console log numbersReversed.
So online 26,
that's this one right here.
We've got a new version of it.
And then we can just call reverse on it.
So numbersReversed.reverse
and now you'll see that that is being reversed
where the other one is still intact.
More likely, I'm gonna do something like this,
where I just immediately call the method
on the array that was created.
And in that case, it's just a one liner,
and then you have a nice variable that makes sense to you.
Let's check, there, that still works fine.
The original one is still intact.
So again, anytime you use a mutation method,
then you...
you must take a copy of it
if you don't want to modify the original array.
So we'll, as we learn all of these different methods,
most of them are immutable.
There's just a couple that sort of are sort of gotchas.
So let's keep going with this names array up here.
So I'm going to just comment out all of this right here.
And let's talk about just working with this names array.
So the most basic thing that you'll want to do
with an array is to add items to it.
And for that, we use the push array.
So we'll take our names array here,
we'll call .push
and you can add lux.
Now, if you console log, names,
you'll see we've got four items in our array.
This does mutate the original array,
like we just said.
So if that's the case where you want to
add an item to the array, but keep the original one intact,
then what you could do is you could say const names2
is equal to a new array,
you spread the old one into it,
and then you can simply just add the new one
in line with it.
There's no need to actually push it in.
We're just creating a new array,
taking a copy of everything else,
and then adding it into there.
That's a pretty common thing to do in React land,
because you don't want to push items into state,
you wanna take a copy and update state.
So, a little bit of a gotcha there,
but that's how we would sorta get around that.
If you want to add an item to the front of an array.
So if we wanna, let's say we wanna add poppy,
we'll say names dot and the, you think like so
like push is to add it to the end.
So clearly unshift is to add it to (chuckling)
it's not pull, unfortunately it's unshift.
And then we simply just add poppy
and that will add it to the front.
We have names at the front.
The immutable way to do that would be
to create a new variable
and make an array,
copy everything that we have so far,
and then add it to the front.
So if that was the case, we would add it right here.
And then do that, and console log names3.
See it's now added to the front.
Oh, I have a second poppy because
I had added it to the item before I made a copy,
but you probably get the point there.
Now let's talk about the two methods
that you will forever goof up in your life.
And that is slice and splice.
I've already talked to you about slice
and what we said a slice will allow you to take
a portion of the original array.
But there also is splice.
They're both used for grabbing a subset of the array,
whereas slice is immutable and splice is mutable.
So let's go take a look at,
we'll say MDN array splice and MDN array slice.
Actually, I'm going to reorder this
so we do slice first and splice second.
And we'll see here slice returns a shallow copy
of a portion of an array from the beginning and the end.
The end is not included, that's non inclusive.
So meaning that when we did the slice right here,
four, it didn't take the fourth item,
it stopped at the third item.
Whereas we have splice here,
this will actually take the item out of the original array.
The other little gotcha is that there's no start and end,
whereas this one has a start and an end.
This one has a start and how many should you go for.
So if you wanna start for one and delete five,
that's where you would use splice.
So let's take a look at this numbers example right here.
I'll just paste it right here.
And it would say numbers.splice
let's say we start at three and go for two,
six would run out.
And then console log numbers.
Let's do it once before and once after.
You'll see before we have one through nine,
after we have one, two, three, four and five are missing.
So we started at the third slot, went for two,
so killed four, killed five, and then
six, seven, eight, nine, are still intact.
So that is mutable or as slice will
just return a new array, leaving the original intact.
So, all that to say, you probably want to use slice.
How do you remember that?
You probably want a slice of pizza, right?
Because, that's a bad example
because if you take a slice of pizza,
it's not like the pizza would just magically heal itself.
And then, that would be amazing
if you had a pizza that you took a slice out,
and it just immediately grew another piece.
But that's not the case.
But you probably want slice because
it does not mutate the original array, splice will.
You can think of you're splicing into the array,
you're taking something out of it.
Now let's talk about adding items to the middle.
Just comment that out.
So we looked at adding to the end,
we looked at adding to the front.
If you wanna add items into the middle of an array,
it is best to use this spread method that we have.
So if I've got an array of bikes.
I'm gonna paste this in here.
We've got bianchi, miele, panasonic and miyata.
And I want to add benotto in between miele and panasonic.
So, how would I do that?
There is no method to insert an item
at a specific index and have the rest push over.
We'll say const newBikes is equal to,
and what we do is we create a new array.
and then you, I'm gonna put this all on its own line here.
So this is, arrays can be multi line,
there's no difference there.
And we take all of the items before that we want,
so dot dot dot, we'll say bikes.slice
we'll start at zero and we'll go to two.
And what that will do, let's just console log new bikes.
Let's see what we got so far.
So we've got bianchi and miele.
So we took the first two.
Then what we'll do is we'll add our new item, benotto.
Okay, so now we've got bianchi, miele,
and then we added the new item, benotto,
and then we wanna take everything else after that.
And we'll spread it into there.
So we'll say bikes.slice
and we want to start at three,
and go for, go until the end.
And if that's the case, you might think like,
oh, just put a really high number in there,
you can even pass it infinity,
but you don't need to do that.
You just say start at three.
And if you don't pass it to end,
it will just go to the end of the array for you.
And what we've done there is we've taken,
oh, that is wrong.
Look at it.
Look what happened.
We have to start at two
and go, I forgot panasonic there.
Beautiful.
So bianchi, miele, our new one,
and then we started again at two and moved on.
The reason why I put three there
is because of the next example,
which is removing an item from the array.
So now if I wanted to remove panasonic from this array,
let's do that.
So const newBikes2 will create a new array.
And now we need to take everything up until panasonic.
So, panasonic is the one, two, three, fourth one.
So we'll say a newBikes.slice
we'll start at zero and we'll go to the third one.
Let's console log that.
See how we're doing.
Bianchi, miele, benatto.
Okay.
And then we will take everything after the panasonic one.
So newBikes.slice
and we'll start at four and go to the end.
And you'll see that we've now removed panasonic.
Why?
Because we took everything up until panasonic,
we skipped one and started with a one plus there
and then went to the end.
That's how you remove an item from an array.
That's a very common thing to do in single page apps,
in React, in Angular, something like that,
where if you need to take an item out of an array,
you basically find where that thing is in the array,
and then use its index to remove it.
Let's do an example just like that.
Because honestly, that's pretty common thing
for me to do in React World.
So if we have a bunch of comments,
so const comments is equal to this.
And we, each item in the comment is an object,
so the text would be Cool Beans,
and the idea of the comment will be 123.
Now I'm just gonna duplicate this,
maybe four or five times.
So just go ahead and do this yourself now.
So one, two, three, four, five.
All right, so I've got a bunch of comments with IDs,
123, 133, 233, 333 and 433.
Then we might make a function called like,
deleteComment, and we take in the ID of the comment,
and we also want to take in the comments array.
Then inside of here, what we need to do is,
we need to first find the index of the item in the array.
And then second, we need to make a new array
without that item in it.
And then third, what we need to do is return our new array.
So this is something we haven't done yet,
is how do you find the index of something
based on the item that you're searching for?
And that is with a method called find index.
So find index works a little something like this.
Let's just do a super simple example.
So we have this names array.
And I wanna find like a what index is kait.
So I can remove that from the array.
What you can do is you say
const kaitIndex is equal to names.findIndex
and you might think like, oh okay,
maybe I can just pass it like kait
and it will tell me what the kait index is.
So let's see, console log kaitIndex.
And it says kait is not a function.
Well that's, it's not as easy as that,
because our structures are gonna be
a little bit more complex than just strings.
Like in this case, we wanna find an object
where the idea of that object is equal
to what we're looking for.
So if that's the case, it's actually similar to a loop
where we will loop over every single item.
And then when we find the item that we want,
we will return true and that will give us the index.
So what we can do is we give each name
and in this call back, we can say if the name
is equal to the one that we're looking for,
so it we'll say kait, then return true,
else return false,
and this is very verbose.
We'll look at some better ways to write that in a second.
But now when I refresh,
it tells me that kait is the index of two.
And we can verify that by saying names square bracket,
kateIndex, and it should give us, kait, good, it does.
Okay, so, this is a bit long.
And what you can do is really
you could do something like this,
you could put the return false on its own line.
And then actually, this returns true or false itself.
So there's no real need for an if statement.
so we can simply just return this condition,
which will either be true or false.
So let's get rid of all this.
Okay, we'll simply just return name is equal to kait.
See if it still works.
It does.
And then we can even go one step further
and use the, this is an explicit return
but we can use an implicit return
by getting rid of the curly brackets,
putting it all on one line,
getting rid of that semi-colon,
and getting rid of the keyword return.
And what this will do, is it will loop over every name,
pass it, the name, and will simply return,
whether that name is equal to kait,
and that still works.
We'll do a lot more of that.
But in our case, we found out that kait is index two.
So we can say const newNamesWithOutKait is equal to,
we'll make a new array.
And we'll say get everything up to kait index,
so we'll say names.slice
start at zero and go on to the kaitIndex.
And then we want everything after kait index.
names.slice
we'll start at the kaitIndex plus one
and we'll go to the end,
so there's no second argument needed there.
Now, if I were just to console log
the newNamesWithOutKait,
oh, I goofed up there.
What happened?
Oh, I see what I did.
I now have an array of two arrays,
because what we've done is we've created an array
and then we've created a new array here
and a new array here.
That's not what we want.
We don't want two arrays.
What we actually want to do is to take the items
out of this array that gets returned
and spread them into this one.
And the way that we can do that
is dot dot dot in front of it.
And that will spread the items into
a top level array, just a one level deep.
You could actually, this is kinda cool.
There's a new method in JavaScript called flat.
So what you could do is,
you could say new namesWithOutKait.flat
and that actually won't work, you see,
it's still that problem.
And that's because that is a immutable method.
So we would need to const newNames,
I don't know, 99, we got lots of variables now.
Then if you look at it,
the flat will actually flatten the array for us.
That's not really great.
You could even tag this flat onto the end here.
And then go ahead and console log it.
That works too.
That's actually not a bad a little solution.
Create an array, and then every single one of these
is an array and then flatten it.
I quite personally believe, personally,
I believe that this is the best way to do it
with the triple dots.
And that just shows you that you spread each of the items
into the new array and we don't need that flat on the end.
Whoo!
So we'll do that quite a bit
where we use this sort of callback function.
Almost all of the methods use this callback API,
and we'll look at that one we hit looping.
So what we'll do here is we will
go up to our deleteComment,
and let's write the code for that.
So the first thing we need to find
the index of the item in the array,
so const commentIndex is equal to, take the comments,
and we will use the findIndex method.
And we'll take each comment
and we'll say if the comment.id
is equal to the id that has been passed in.
So that's a little bit different,
because we're not just looking for the name
to be directly to kait,
we're looking for an object where its ID property
is equal to the ID that was passed into the function.
Then what we can do is simply just return a new array.
And in that array can be everything up until,
so make a new array with those items in it.
So say comments.slice(0, and go to that commentIndex.
And then we will get everything after that.
So we'll take the commentIndex plus one.
So skip.
The one, the comment that we wanna get rid of
is right here and that's essentially
what we're getting rid of right there,
and we're returning that in one swoop.
So now if I go here
and take a look at comments,
and I want to remove a comment,
what was it called?
DeleteComment.
And we pass it the ID of 233.
And the comments array,
you see that it returns to us
this four comments instead of the original five.
The original ones are still there.
And the return value is a new value.
If you did wanna overwrite that,
you could make this a let and simply just overwrite
the entire array with the new values there.
I think that's enough for now.
We'll go into some more methods in the next video.